hello mass farms the second model of
disease spread that we're going to be
looking at is that of traveling waves
you might be thinking why are we talking
about waves in this particular context
and the picture to have in mind is one
of a wave of illness spreading and
moving through a population
mathematically a wave is something that
propagates with a constant shape and
moves with a constant speed and
solutions of this form are called
traveling wave solutions these traveling
wave solutions appear in our models by
adding in spatial dependence in other
words we want to allow people to move
around within our model and within our
epidemic scenario in the SAR model I
talked about previously we only had time
dependence for our three variables and
you can see this because in each
equation we had only a time derivative
so we were looking at how those
populations changed over time what we
want to do now is allow the populations
to also change in space because people
might start to move around so what we're
doing is creating a slightly more
realistic model our starting point is
going to be the same si our model that
we've looked at before so if we remember
we had three different equations for the
three compartments of our population we
had s the susceptibles those who could
still catch the disease we had I for the
infective so those who currently have
the disease and are spreading it through
the population and are for the recovered
category which are those who have caught
the disease and either died or recovered
and are now immune the model gave us
three differential equations for each of
the three populations so starting with
the susceptibles s we had that the s by
DT the rate of change over time of the
number of susceptibles was equal to
minus some rate of transmission R times
the number of in fact
of x s the number of susceptibles and
remember we had these two terms here
because the disease was transmitted
between populations between the
susceptibles and infective x' through
contact so very similar to what we're
seeing at the moment with kovat 19 our
second equation was for the number of
invectives and again the time rate of
change of the number of effectives di by
DT so now this increased by the same
factor of R I s as people caught the
disease but we also saw that this
decreased due to some rate of recovery
or death which we labeled with a times
the number of effectives i and then our
third and final equation for the
recovered population ah told us that the
rate of change over time of the
recovered population was this recovery
or death rate a multiplied by I and this
one of course is positive because the
our population is growing in this
instance since we're introducing spatial
dependence to our original si our model
we need to make some additional
assumptions that explain how people
interact with the space around them so
our first assumption is going to be that
these susceptibles
that s population are not going to move
so in the context of the current kovat
19 outbreak you can think of assumption
1 as saying that people susceptible to
the disease stay at home the second
assumption is going to be about the
movement of the infective so people that
are infective are indeed going to move
and we're going to say that the
infective --zz migrate at a constant
rate the third and final assumption is
going to be about the removed population
and again we say that once you're in the
removed population you again don't move
so in summary all of the spatial
dependence is really focused
on the effectives and assumption number
two here the susceptibles don't move
they stay at home the removed population
also doesn't move and we're really
interested in how those who have the
disease and can infect others are going
to migrate and spread the disease
through the population what this means
for our equations is that we have an
additional term in the second equation
this di by DT equation from the original
si our model so we add in this term
which has a constant d so this is going
to be our constant rate of diffusion and
then the way we're going to model the
diffusion mathematically is with a
derivative so we say that we have a
second derivative of i with respect to x
because our populations now depend on
both time and space this is why we have
a partial derivative in this formula
over here and so i'm going to do the
same and convert these derivatives into
curly lettered DS and this is what
signifies that it's a partial derivative
and that our functions or our variables
si and R now depend on both time and
space to begin to analyze the equations
we first do something called non
dimensionalization the details here are
not that important but the key idea is
to take all of the constants that are in
our equations and then combine them in
such a way that we get one key parameter
and when we do this we actually see that
the parameter that appears is this
reproductive number R naught that we saw
in the first video about the basic si
our model the basic reproductive number
R naught gives the number of secondary
infections that we expect to happen on
average in the population from a single
primary infection so in other words it's
the number of people that you expect one
infected individual to
the disease onto and we define this
mathematically as R naught is equal to
the initial susceptible population s
naught multiplied by the contact ratio Q
the contact ratio Q itself is equal to R
divided by a where R and a and the
numbers over here in our model and it is
defined to be the fraction of the
population that comes into contact with
an infected individual during their
period of infectiousness as well as non
dimensionalizing we use a second
mathematical trick which is to change
variables so at the moment we have our
three populations s I and R which all
depend on time T and space X and what we
want to do is create a new variable
which we're going to call Y and then
we're going to convert these equations
into differential equations just
involving this one new variable which is
given by X minus a constant C times time
and making this change of variables is
going to really simplify our set of
equations as you can see our equations
have changed quite dramatically so we no
longer have derivatives in terms of X
and T with partial or curly DS we've
gone back to full derivatives in terms
of just our single variable Y well
remember Y is X minus C times T we'll
also notice that we only now have two
equations the equation for R hasn't
vanished I've just decided to ignore it
for now and we can come back to it later
if we really want to know about the
recovered population once again we find
ourselves wanting to solve a set of
differential equations which means we
need some boundary or initial conditions
so what we do here is we go backwards
in time - before the start of the
epidemic so if we let time here go to
minus infinity which means going back
into the past then why is actually going
to go to plus infinity because of this
minus sign so going all the way back to
the past so times going to minus
infinity which because of this minus
remember means Y goes to plus infinity
then we must have that the number of
effectives
must go to zero because this is a time
before the disease even existed in the
population it's before the disease
outbreak occurred so we have zero
infective x' going backwards in time and
we also have that the susceptibles s
must go to the initial susceptible
population in the first si our model
that we looked at this initial
susceptible population we labeled s
naught but since we've done a non
dimensionalization what we've actually
done is convert our I and s from being
full population numbers into now being
population ratios or the proportions of
a specific given population so for s to
go back to the initial susceptible
population S naught in the non
dimensional model that means s must go
to one we can also think about what we
expect to happen in the future so the
future here is when we let time T go to
infinity and that is going to make y go
to minus infinity because of this
negative sign so as Y goes to minus
infinity then the outbreak must have
passed so really far down in the future
the disease has come in it's spread
through the population and now it's
disappeared once again so as Y goes to
minus infinity which is the future we
must also have that I goes to zero now
we don't yet know the value of s
in the future that's something we're
going to want to find out which is what
we're going to do when we start to
explore the model a little bit further
in the next steps the first question
that we might want to know the answer to
is going to be how fast the disease is
going to spread through the population
because we're now picturing the disease
as a wave propagating through the
population at spreading the illness we
can calculate the wave speed and that
will tell us the speed of the spread of
the disease in our outbreak so this is
going to be question one to answer this
question we use a clever tool called
linearization I'm not going to go
through all of the details but the basic
idea is that we use the value of s in
the past to make an approximation so as
we go into the past Y goes to infinity s
is going to 1 and so what we do is we
say that s is equal to 1 minus P where
this term P is going to be small it's an
approximation and then because we are
linearizing this is telling us that we
want to substitute this into our
equations and ignore any terms which are
P squared and higher we now have the set
of equations here in blue which whilst
it might not look necessarily any
simpler it's now in a form that allows
us to use another mathematical tool this
one is called phase plane analysis and
applying phase plane analysis to these
two equations actually tells us that for
traveling wave solutions to exist then
we must have that C is greater than or
equal to 2 times the square root of 1
minus 1 over the reproductive number r0
and this expression it turns out is
actually the minimum possible wave speed
for there to be a traveling wave
solution to this entire problem and with
just a little bit more work you can show
that not only is this the minimum
required wave speed for a traveling wave
solution to exist but typically the wave
speed itself is given by this minimum
value so the value C which appear down
here in our change of variables formula
is actually the speed of our traveling
wave and therefore is the speed of the
spread of the disease as it propagates
through our population in any epidemic
but in particular for the current Kovan
19:00 outbreak we want to make this
speed of the disease spread as small as
possible we want to slow down the
propagation of the disease through the
population and looking at this formula
we can make C small by making R naught
also small because we're subtracting
here the number one divided by our Lord
so if we make our not small we subtract
off a larger and larger number so you
might be thinking what happens when C
goes negative which could happen if R
naught was small enough now this
actually cannot happen in the case of an
epidemic which is what we're considering
here because we saw in our first basic
si R model that an epidemic will occur
provided R naught the basic reproductive
number is greater than 1 so the absolute
smallest value that R naught can be is 1
and when you substitute in R naught
equals 1 into this expression that gives
you C equals naught so whilst we want to
make our not as small as possible to
lower the speed of the spread of the
disease the minimum value we can get it
down to is just above
one and to do that we look down at our
formula and see that the only thing we
can control here is the contact ratio Q
the number of susceptibles s not this is
fixed this is pretty much everybody for
Co vid 19 because it's never been around
before so we can all catch it we are all
susceptible to this brand new disease
but we can lower the contact ratio so Q
remember the contact ratio is the
fraction of the population that comes
into contact with an infected individual
during their period of infectiousness so
to lower the contact ratio Q we number
one wash our hands all at the time
number two we stay at home as much as
possible and number three if we do have
to go outside we minimize contact
through social distancing another
question we might want to know the
answer to is what is the severity of the
epidemic so we did something similar in
our first video about the original si
our model and we saw that the key
parameter or the key thing we needed to
calculate was the number of susceptibles
left at the end of the epidemic because
if we know the number of people left at
the end who have been unaffected by the
disease then this will actually tell us
how many people have been affected by
the disease and therefore how severe the
epidemic was because we know the total
population must be equal to the two
components added together
so the thing we want to know here is
what is the value of s end which in our
boundary conditions we want to know s
minus infinity because we want to go
into the future so here what we want to
do is take the top equation and this
term here for I s and then substitute
because this is equal to C times the s
by D Y so what to take that and
substitute it into here in our second
equation because when we do that our
second equation now has y derivatives on
every term and so we can integrate the
whole equation and get a nice neat
expression involving I and s having made
the substitution and done the
integration we get the following
equation di by dy plus C times I plus C
multiplied by s minus 1 over R naught
log s is equal to a constant and to
calculate the value of the constant we
have to use our initial or boundary
conditions so here if we go back to the
past so we let Y go to infinity then I
must go to 0 and so the derivative the I
by dy will also go to 0 and s will go to
1 so if we substitute those values in
here this gives you the value C to get
the number of susceptibles left at the
end of the outbreak and therefore know
the severity of the epidemic we need to
let time go to infinity we need to go
into the future so this tells us that I
goes to 0 so we're going to lose the DI
by dy term and the item here and then
the S term will go to our value s end
which is what we want to know
so this equation at the bottom of the
board SN minus 1 over R naught log of SN
D equal to 1 gives us an implicit
equation which we need to solve for s
end like we've seen before the best way
to deal with these implicit equations is
to plot a graph to try to understand
what's going on and the relationship
between s end and R naught now before I
do that it's worth thinking about the
range of values that s N and R naught
can possibly take so because we've been
considering this non dimensionalized
model we saw earlier that this means
that s is actually a propor
of the initial susceptible population
and so it can only vary between zero and
one we also have some restrictions on
the value of R naught so we saw here
when we were discussing the traveling
wave speed and the speed of spread of
the disease that are not remember has to
be greater than one if there's to be an
epidemic in the first place since we are
modeling the spread of an epidemic this
means that R zero must also be bounded
by one if I now plot the graph what we
see is a curve that rapidly decreases
like so so we have this maximum value
for s end being 1 which means nobody
caught the disease the susceptible
population at the end of the outbreak is
identical to the number of susceptibles
at the very beginning this is the
best-case scenario that you can hope for
in any epidemic and from this maximum
value of 1 we see that s n starts to
decrease as the value of R naught
increases further and further so to go
back to our question about what is the
severity of the epidemic we said that
the total number of people who catch the
disease will be lower if the number of
people unaffected or the number of
susceptibles left at the end is as large
as possible so we want to make s end as
big as possible by varying R naught and
so on our graph it's very clear that to
do this we want to make R naught as
small as we can so here that means
making are not as close to 1 as possible
and the way to do that is to reduce the
contact ratio Q we're back in the same
position that we've been in three or
four times before it all comes down to
reducing the value of Q so washing your
hands staying at home and if you have to
go out practice social distancing
so in summary using our traveling wave
model for the spread
a disease we've been able to derive an
equation for the wave speed which
remember is the speed at which the
disease will spread through the
population and we've also been able to
get this equation at the bottom which
determines the number of susceptible
people left at the end of the outbreak
now to minimize the severity and the
impact of an outbreak such as the
current one with Co vid 19 what we want
to do is to lower the wave speed as much
as possible make the disease spread as
slowly as possible to give us more time
to try to come up with measures to
combat it such as vaccines and to do
this we saw that we want to make R
naught as small as we can where the
lower bound for R naught is 1 so to get
R naught down to 1 we go to our formula
over here which tells us that R naught
is the contact ratio Q times s naught
and so to make our not small and reduce
the speed of the spread of the disease
we want to lower the contact ratio Q
then for our second question about the
severity of the epidemic we got this
equation for the number of susceptibles
at the end and we want to make this as
large as possible because the number of
susceptibles left at the end of the
outbreak tells us the number of people
who have been unaffected by the disease
and so they haven't caught the disease
so we want to make s end as large as
possible so considering the graph over
here we saw that s n has a maximum of 1
and we can get closer and closer to that
maximum by again making R naught as
close to 1 as small as possible and this
was once again done by reducing the
contact ratio Q now I know I keep
banging the same drum telling you we've
got to lower this contact ratio Q but
the fact that it keeps coming up in all
of these models is actually really good
news because it gives us one specific
parameter
that we want to make as small as
possible and this is the power of
mathematical modeling because even here
when we introduce spatial dependence
into the SI R model from the first video
we get different solutions they now look
like travelling waves but all of the
things we want to happen a slower spread
of the disease fewer people getting the
disease all of these things have the
same thing in common they are all
reduced by making the contact ratio q as
small as possible so this is why all of
the measures washing your hands staying
at home where possible and if you have
to go out practicing social distancing
all of these measures are designed to
reduce the contact ratio and to help us
try to control the spread of CO vid 19
thank you everyone for watching please
do remember to subscribe to my channel
if you've enjoyed this video and I'll be
back soon with some more maths take care
you